>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 29: THE
WORLD'S ATTENTION TURNS AGAIN
TO PARIS, NOW FOR A HIGHLY
ANTICIPATED GLOBAL SUMMIT ON
CLIMATE CHANGE.
POPE FRANCIS IN AFRICA.
VISITING A NATION CAUGHT IN A
VIOLENT CONFLICT BETWEEN
CHRISTIANS AND MUSLIMS.
AND, "PAIN AND PROMISE."
WE'LL PREVIEW A SERIES OF
SPECIAL REPORTS FROM NIGERIA.
>> Reporter: I'VE BEEN ASKED FOR
BRIBES BY POLICE OFFICERS, BY
SOLDIERS, BY AIRPORT SECURITY
OFFICERS BEHIND THE X-RAY
MACHINE.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
WORLD LEADERS ARE DESCENDING ON
PARIS FOR THE TWO-WEEK UNITED
NATIONS CLIMATE CHANGE
CONFERENCE THAT STARTS TOMORROW.
FRANCE WILL HOST MORE THAN 190
DELEGATIONS AND 140 HEADS OF
STATE, INCLUDING PRESIDENT
BARACK OBAMA, WHO LEFT TODAY.
THE WHITE HOUSE SAID TODAY THE
U.S. AND 18 OTHER COUNTRIES
FINANCING 80% OF THE WORLD'S
CLEAN ENERGY RESEARCH AND
DEVELOPMENT, WILL ANNOUNCE
TOMORROW THEY WILL DOUBLE THOSE
INVESTMENTS OVER THE NEXT FIVE
YEARS.
LEADERS ARE GATHERING IN THE
HOPE OF REACHING AGREEMENTS TO
REDUCE EMISSIONS OF HEAT-
TRAPPING GASES LIKE THE CARBON
DIOXIDE CREATED FROM BURNING
COAL AND GAS.
U.N. SECRETARY GENERAL BAN KI
MOON SAID TODAY WHATEVER IS
AGREED ON, EMISSION TARGETS
SHOULD BE REVIEWED EVERY FIVE
YEARS TO LIMIT THE GLOBAL
TEMPERATURE RISE.
THOUSANDS OF SUPPORTERS OF
BINDING AGREEMENTS MARCHED TODAY
IN LONDON, AMSTERDAM, ROME, AND
OTHER CITIES AROUND THE WORLD.
IN RIO DE JANEIRO, BRAZIL,
MARCHERS CALLED ATTENTION TO
DEFORESTATION, WHICH IS BLAMED
FOR 15% OF GREENHOUSE GAS
EMISSIONS.
GERMANY IS CONSIDERING SENDING
SOLDIERS TO SUPPORT, BUT NOT
DIRECTLY FIGHT, IN THE WAR ON
THE SO-CALLED ISLAMIC STATE IN
IRAQ AND SYRIA, OR ISIS.
THE COUNTRY'S DEFENSE MINISTER
SAID TODAY THAT IT COULD SEND AS
MANY AS 1,200 SOLDIERS TO THE
MIDDLE EAST BY YEAR'S END.
UNDER THE PLAN, A GERMAN SHIP
WOULD REFUEL FIGHTER JETS FROM
THE U.S. AND FRANCE-LED
COALITION CARRYING OUT
AIRSTRIKES ON ISIS, WHILE ITS
JETS WOULD PROVIDE AIRBORNE
SURVEILLANCE.
GERMANY IS ALREADY PROVIDING
WEAPONS AND TRAINING FOR KURDISH
FIGHTERS BATTLING ISIS IN IRAQ.
THE PLAN REQUIRES APPROVAL FROM
THE COUNTRY'S PARLIAMENT.
CHANCELLOR ANGELA MERKEL PLEDGED
GREATER GERMAN INVOLVEMENT
FOLLOWING THE NOVEMBER 13 PARIS
TERRORIST ATTACKS.
THE EUROPEAN UNION HAS AGREED TO
PAY TURKEY TO STEM THE FLOW OF
MIGRANTS COMING INTO EUROPE FROM
TURKEY.
THE DEAL REACHED TODAY IN
BRUSSELS BY THE 28 MEMBER E.U.
WOULD PAY TURKEY THREE BILLION
EUROS-- ABOUT $3.2 BILLION--
OVER THE NEXT TWO YEARS TO AID
THE TWO MILLION SYRIAN REFUGEES
IN TURKEY.
NEGOTIATED OVER THE PAST SEVERAL
WEEKS, THE AGREEMENT AIMS TO
IMPROVE LIVING STANDARDS FOR
REFUGEES AND MIGRANTS -- HOPING
TO PERSUADE THEM TO STAY IN
TURKEY AND NOT ATTEMPT TO CROSS
INTO GREECE, BULGARIA, AND ONTO
OTHER EUROPEAN COUNTRIES.
IF THAT EFFORT SUCCEEDS, THE
E.U. MAY OFFER TURKS VISA-FREE
TRAVEL TO EUROPE IN A YEAR'S
TIME.
U.S. ATTORNEY GENERAL LORETTA
LYNCH IS CALLING FRIDAY'S
MULTIPLE SHOOTING AT A COLORADO
SPRINGS PLANNED PARENTHOOD
CLINIC QUOTE "A CRIME AGAINST
WOMEN RECEIVING HEALTH CARE
SERVICES."
LYNCH SAYS AGENTS FROM THE
F.B.I. AND THE BUREAU OF ALCOHOL
TOBACCO AND FIREARMS ARE
ASSISTING LOCAL INVESTIGATORS ON
THE SHOOTING AND STANDOFF THAT
KILLED THREE PEOPLE -- A POLICE
OFFICER, ANOTHER MAN, AND A
WOMAN -- AND WOUNDED NINE
OTHERS.
NONE OF PLANNED PARENTHOOD'S 15
EMPLOYEES WERE HURT.
SEVERAL NEWS ORGANIZATIONS ARE
QUOTING AN UNNAMED LAW
ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL BRIEFED ON
THE INVESTIGATION AS TELLING
THEM THAT ACCUSED GUNMAN ROBERT
LEWIS DEAR SAID, QUOTE, "NO MORE
BABY PARTS," UNQUOTE, DURING A
RAMBLING POLICE INTERVIEW AFTER
HIS ARREST.
THE PLANNED PARENTHOOD SITE
PERFORMS ABORTIONS AND HAS BEEN
THE SITE OF REGULAR ANTI-
ABORTION PROTESTS.
DEAR'S FIRST COURT APPEARANCE IS
TOMORROW.
ON THIS BUSY, END-OF-HOLIDAY-
WEEKEND TRAVEL DAY, THERE ARE
DANGEROUS DRIVING CONDITIONS
THROUGHOUT TEXAS, OKLAHOMA, AND
KANSAS.
EIGHT PEOPLE DIED IN FLOODS IN
NORTHERN TEXAS, AND SIX PEOPLE
DIED IN ACCIDENTS ON ICY ROADS
IN KANSAS AND OKLAHOMA.
MANY ROADS WERE COVERED WITH ICE
FOLLOWING A WINTER STORM THAT
BEGAN ON THURSDAY.
80,000 OKLAHOMANS WERE LEFT
WITHOUT ELECTRICITY TODAY.
FLOOD WARNINGS REMAINED IN
EFFECT IN PARTS OF TEXAS WHERE
SWELLING WATERWAYS SWEPT CARS
OFF ROADS.
TEMPERATURES ARE EXPECTED TO
WARM, BUT WATER LEVELS ALONG THE
TRINITY RIVER AND THE RIO GRANDE
ARE EXPECTED TO CONTINUE TO RISE
THROUGHOUT THE WEEK.
>> Sreenivasan: TODAY, POPE
FRANCIS BROUGHT A MESSAGE OF
PEACE AND RECONCILIATION TO THE
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC, A
MAJORITY CHRISTIAN NATION THAT
HAS SEEN STEADY VIOLENCE BETWEEN
CHRISTIANS AND MUSLIMS DURING
THE PAST TWO YEARS.
THIS WAS THE POPE'S FINAL STOP
OF AN AFRICAN TOUR THAT ALSO
TOOK HIM TO UGANDA AND KENYA.
"ASSOCIATED PRESS" REPORTER
NICOLE WINFIELD IS COVERING THE
TRIP, AND SHE JOINS ME NOW BY
SKYPE FROM THE CAPITAL OF THE
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC,
BANGUI.
IT'S BEEN QUITE SOME TIME SINCE
THE POPE WALKED INTO ESSENTIALLY
AN ACTIVE WAR ZONE OR CIVIL WAR
ZONE.
>> YEAH, WE WERE TRYING TO THINK
WHEN THE LAST TIME WAS.
POPE JOHN PAUL 2 MADE A VERY
UNEXPECTED NINE HOUR STOP IN
KHARTOUM ABOUT 20 YEARS AGO AND
THAT IS PROBABLY THE CLOSEST
THAT ANY POPE HAS GOTTEN TO
ACTIVE FIGHTING.
>> Sreenivasan: APP WHAT DID
THE POPE DO TODAY?
WHERE DID HE GO?
>> HE ARRIVED AT THE AIRPORT
WHICH IN ITSELF IS REMARKABLE.
A HEAVILY ARMED AIRPORT.
HE FLEW IN OVER ONE OF THE
DISPLACEMENT CAMPS WHERE SOME OF
THE PEOPLE WHO HAVE BEEN
UPROOTED BY THE FIGHTING HAVE
SETTLED.
HE WENT THEN TO THE PRESIDENTIAL
PALACE.
EWEN TO A REFUGEE CAMP, ANOTHER
ONE OF THESE DISPLACEMENT CAMPS
WHERE HE MET WITH SOME OF THE
RESIDENTS AND HE JUST FINISHED
CELEBRATING MASS AT THE
CATHEDRAL.
>> Sreenivasan: SO THE TENSION
IS BETWEEN MUSLIMS AND
CHRISTIANS IN THE COUNTRY.
WHAT DID THE POPE SAY TO EACH
GROUP?
>> WELL, HE HAD A MAJORITY
CHRISTIAN AUDIENCE TODAY SO FAR.
BUT THE MESSAGE IS THE SAME TO
BOTH.
LAY DOWN YOUR WEAPONS.
PEACE, RECONCILIATION.
HE JUST NOW IN HIS HOMILY HAS
TOLD THE FAITHFUL GATHERED IN
THE CATHEDRAL THAT PARDONING AND
FORGIVING ONE ANOTHER IS HARD.
IT'S THE HARDEST THING TO DO.
BUT CHRISTIANS AT LEAST ARE
CALLED TO LOVE THEIR ENEMIES AND
THAT THAT IS WHAT IS NECESSARY
NOW.
>> Sreenivasan: AND HOW HAS HE
BEEN RECEIVED?
>> THE ENTHUSIASM HAS BEEN
INCREDIBLE.
THIS IS A COUNTRY THAT HAS BEEN
AS THE PRESIDENT SAID, IT'S
DESCENDED INTO HELL OVER THE
PAST TWO YEARS.
SO I THINK FOR THE RESIDENTS,
JUST THE FACT THAT HE CAME WAS
REMARKABLE.
I DON'T THINK ANYONE REALLY
EXPECTED THAT HE WOULD.
THERE WERE SUCH SERIOUS SECURITY
THREATS IN THE WEEKS AND MONTHS
LEADING UP TO THIS TRIP THAT
THERE WERE CONCERNS HE WOULD
COUNCIL, OR AT LEAST TRIM IT
BACK.
SO THE FACT THAT HE ARRIVED AND
THE FACT THAT HE WENT FIEF
KILOMETERS IN AN OPEN POPE
MOBILE SHOWED THAT HE'S NOT
AFRAID.
AND THAT HE WANTED TO-- JUST HIS
PRESENCE TO BE HERE.
>> Sreenivasan: GIVE US SOME
PERSPECTIVE ON HOW SIGNIFICANT
THIS FIGHTING HAS BEEN.
THERE IS PRETTY MUCH AN EXODUS
OF MUSLIMS LEAVING THAT COUNTRY.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
AND THE MUSLIMS WHO HAVE
REMAINED THERE ITSELF ARE
ESSENTIALLY ENCIRCLED
IN A QUARTER.
THE THE KM-5 NEIGHBORHOOD OF THE
CAPITOL AND THEY BASICALLY CAN'T
LEAVE BECAUSE THE CHRISTIAN
MILITIA IS ESSENTIALLY
SURROUNDED IT FOR THEIR OWN
SAFETY.
SO THE MUSLIMS HERE WHO HAVE
STAYED HERE ARE VERY MUCH A
BESIEGED PEOPLE.
THEY ARE HOPING ALSO TO HEAR
SOME WORDS FROM THE POPE, SOME
WORDS OF ENCOURAGEMENT FOR THEM.
AND THEY MIGHT GET IT TOMORROW
WHEN HE GOES INTO THAT QUARTER.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
NICOLE WINFIELD FROM THE
ASSOCIATED PRESS JOINING US VIA
SKYPE FROM THE CAPITAL OF THE
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: NIGERIA IS
AFRICA'S RICHEST AND FASTEST-
GROWING ECONOMY AND AMERICA'S
TOP TRADING PARTNER ON THE
CONTINENT.
BUT AT THE SAME TIME, NIGERIANS
ARE TWICE AS LIKELY TO BE
IMPOVERISHED TODAY THAN THEY
WERE 30 YEARS AGO.
THE POVERTY, AND WIDESPREAD
CORRUPTION, HAS HELPED FUEL THE
NIGERIA-BASED ISLAMIC EXTREMIST
GROUP BOKO HARAM - WHICH HAS
BECOME THE DEADLIEST TERROR
ORGANIZATION IN THE WORLD,
RESPONSIBLE FOR 20,000 DEATHS
DURING A SIX-YEAR INSURGENCY.
TOMORROW, THE NEWSHOUR WILL
BEGIN A FOUR-PART SERIES TAKING
A CLOSER LOOK AT THIS NATION OF
ABOUT 180 MILLION PEOPLE.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
NICK SCHIFRIN, WHO WILL JOIN ME
IN A MOMENT, TRAVELED TO NIGERIA
TO REPORT ON THE THREAT FROM
BOKO HARAM, THE ECONOMY,
CORRUPTION, AND ANTI-GAY
VIOLENCE.
CORRUPTION IS THE FOCUS OF THE
FOLLOWING EXCERPT FROM THE
SERIES CALLED "PAIN AND
PROMISE."
>> ON THE STREETS THERE IS A
SAYING, EVERY DAY IT'S FOR
THE-- HE WAS SUPPOSED TO BE HIS
PROTECTOR.
>> THE POLICE OFTEN ASK FOR
MONEY.
>> IT'S SO COMMON IN
NIGERIA HERE.
TAKING MONEY FROM PEOPLE.
BY FORCE.
>> HE DROVE A TAXI CALLED A
TRICYCLE.
LAST MONTH THE POLICE OFFICER
STOPPED HIM TO DEMAND A BRIBE.
>> FOR $2,000.
>> THAT IS ABOUT $10, WHAT HE
WOULD HAVE MADE WORKING AS A
TAXI DRIVER THAT MORNING.
>> SO I SAY I'M COMING FROM THE
CHURCH WITH MY FAMILY.
>> HE WAS WITH HIS WIFE AND
THEIR THREE CHILDREN.
HE REFUSED TO PAY.
>> ALL OF A SUDDEN, I HEARD A
GUN SHOT, TWICE.
AND NOW WENT DOWN.
AND THE BLOOD WAS JUST GUSHING
OUT.
>> SO THE BULLET CAME RIGHT
THROUGH THERE.
>> RIGHT THROUGH HERE.
>> THE OFFICER HAD SHOT HIM FOR
REFUSING TO PAY $10.
>> THE PERCEPTION HAS BEEN THAT
THE POLICE IS CORRUPT.
YOU CAN ABUSE THE RIGHTS OF THE
AVERAGE CITIZEN.
>> SHE STUDIES POLICE
CORRUPTION.
SHE SAYS LOW SALARIES AND A
CULTURE OF IMPUNITY HAS LEAD TO
THIS.
VIDEOS ON LOCAL MEDIA SHOW
POLICE OFFICERS INSIDE PEOPLE'S
CARS DEMANDING MONEY.
>> THE OFFICER EXHIBITS NO
SHAME.
HIS VICTIMS REVEAL NO SURPRISE.
>> THIS IS THE NUMBER, THIS IS
RECORDED.
>> I DON'T HAVE MORE THAN 2,000.
>> IN NIGERIA THIS IS DAILY
LIFE.
FOR SOME, WHEN THE PERSON ASKING
FOR MONEY HAS A CLUB OR A GUN,
BRIBES ARE MORE LIKE RANSOM.
>> LOW LEVEL CORRUPTION MAKES IT
WORSE, WHEN YOU COME IN CONTACT
WITH POLICE OFFICERS.
WHEN YOU GO AND REPORT A CASE
AND THE CASE CAN BE TURNED
AGAINST THE PERSON THAT HAS COME
TO REPORT.
>> IN NIGERIA THE CORRUPTION IS
SADLY EVERYWHERE.
SHOP KEEPERS HERE SAY POLICE
PRESIDE OVER A MARKET FOR FAKE
MEDICINE.
I HAVE BEEN ASKED FOR BRIBES BY
POLICE OFFICERS, BY SOLDIERS, BY
AIRPORT SECURITY OFFICERS,
BEHIND THE X-RAY MACHINE.
IN NIGERIA THE CANCER OF
CORRUPTION HAS BEEN SPREADING
FOR YEARS.
>> OFTEN IT STARTS IN CHILDHOOD.
ED SCHOOL LOOKS LIKE MANY RURAL
NIGERIAN SCHOOLS.
THIS IS THE SECOND GRADE
CLASSROOM.
NO DESKS, NO CHAIRS, NO PENCILS,
NO BOOKS.
>> HOW CAN THEY LEARN TO SIT ON
THE GROUND.
>> THE PRINCIPAL POINTS OUT THIS
IS MOSTLY NOT ABOUT POVERTY.
THE 2014 FEDERAL EDUCATION
BUDGET WAS $2.4 BILLION.
MOHAMMED ACCUSES THE GOVERNMENT
OF POCKETING MONEY THAT IS
SUPPOSED TO EDUCATE CHILDREN.
>>.
>> THIS WAS DONE IN 2009.
>> YES.
>> HE HAS BEEN ASKING THE LOCAL
GOVERNMENT TO FIX HIS CLASSROOM.
THE WIN BLEW THE ROOF OFF SIX
YEARS AGO.
>> THE CONTRACTOR USED THIS
INSTEAD OF THE WOOD THEY WERE
SUPPOSED TO USE.
>> THEY WERE SUPPOSED TO USE,
2X4, THEY USE 2-D X2.
>> THE THINNESS OF THIS WOOD,
THIS IS WHY THE ROOF CAME DOWN.
>> SO THEY'RE KEEPING A PART OF
THE MONEY AS OPPOSED TO USING.
>> THAT IS TRUE.
>> AND THEY'RE PUTTING IT IN
THEIR POCKET.
>> THAT IS IT, THAT IS ACTUALLY
WHAT HAPPENED.
>> IS TA BECAUSE THE GOVERNMENT
IS IN ON IT.
>> THAT'S IT.
THAT IS THE PROBLEM.
>> WHY IS THERE NOT MONEY COMING
TO THE SCHOOL?
>> THE CORRUPTION FROM OUR
LEADERS.
>> SYLVESTER SAY LOCAL HUMAN
RIGHTS CAMPAIGN.
HE ACCUSES GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS
OF THEFT.
>> THEY MAKE PROMISES WHEN THEY
COME ON BOARD, THEY WILL DO
THIS, THEY WILL DO THAT.
BUT AT THE END OF THE DAY,
THEY.
>> AND I AM JOINED BY NICK
SCHIFRIN IN THE STUDIO.
WHAT THIS PIECE, WHAT IS THE
GOVERNMENT'S RESPONSE.
>> THE GOVERNMENT IS TAKING THIS
VERY SERIOUSLY.
THE NEW GOVERNMENT IS TAKING
THIS VERY SERIOUSLY.
A SENIOR ADVISOR ON CORRUPTION
ISSUES PUTS IT THIS WAY.
EITHER WE KILL CORRUPTION OR
CORRUPTION KILLS THE COUNTRY.
THE NEW PRESIDENT HAS COMMITTEES
LOOKING, ESPECIALLY AT HIGH
LEVEL CORRUPTION.
AND THE FOCUS IS ON 20 BILLION
DOLLARS, THAT'S THE ACCUSATION
THAT HAS BEEN STOLEN BY OIL
OFFICIALS BECAUSE MOST OF
NIGERIA'S MONEY COMES FROM THAT
OIL.
BUT ALSO MONEY STOLEN FROM THE
MILITARY.
MONEY THAT WAS SUPPOSED TO GO TO
FIGHT BOKO HARAM INSTEAD GOT
DIVERTED.
SO THAT IS THE FOCUS OF THIS NEW
GOVERNMENT AND THEY HOPE IF THEY
CAN GET SOME HIGH LEVEL
PROSECUTIONS, SOME HIGH PROFILE
PROSECUTIONS, THAT WILL SEND A
MESSAGE THAT THE DAYS OF
IMPUNITY ARE OVER AND THEN YOU
WILL SEE A DIFFERENCE OR AT
LEAST A LITTLE LESS LOW LEVEL
CORRUPTION BECAUSE THOSE
OFFICERS YOU SAW WILL FEEL LIKE
WELL, IF THE BIG PEOPLE CAN'T
GET AWAY FROM IT, NEITHER CAN
WE.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU ALSO HAVE
A STORY ABOUT THE ECONOMY, WHAT
DID YOU FIND.
>> AS YOU MENTIONED AT THE TOP
OF THIS SEGMENT, IT'S A NATION
OF SUPERLATIVES, RICHEST COUNTRY
IN AFRICAN, BIGGEST OIL PRODUCER
FASTEST GROWING ECONOMY.
BY 2015 THERE WILL BE MORE
NIGERIANS THAN AMERICANS.
THE MIDDLE CLASS WILL GROW BY
EIGHT, THE MORE ULTRA RICH
GROWING IN NIGERIA THAN THE
U.S.
THE ALSO A HUNDRED MILLION
PEOPLE IN POVERTY.
VERY DIFFICULT TO GET THOSE
PEOPLE OUT SO LONG AS YOU HAVE A
LACK OF INFRASTRUCTURE, A LACK
OF ELECTRICITY AND A LACK OF
INVESTMENT AND AGRICULTURE.
THOSE ARE THE THREE AREAS THAT
THE NEW GOVERNMENT IS TRYING TO
FOCUS ON BUT AGAIN AFTER DECADES
OF NEGLECT AND SOME OF THAT
CORRUPTION, IT'S VERY DIFFICULT
TO LIFT SO MANY PEOPLE OUT OF
POVERTY.
>> Sreenivasan: MOST OF THE
HEADLINES FROM NIGERIA ARE
COMING FROM BOKO HARAM AND YOU
HAVE ANOTHER PIECE ON THAT.
>> 6600 PEOPLE KILLED BY BOKO
HARAM LAST YEAR.
THAT IS MORE THAN THE ISLAMIC
STATE.
THAT WILL GIVE YOU A SENSE OF
HOW DEADLY THAT GROUP HAS BEEN.
THERE HAVE BEEN SOME GAINS IN
THE LAST NINE MONTHS ESPECIALLY
AGAINST BOKO HARAM.
THE NIGERIAN MILITARY MADE
GAINS.
EARLIER THEY BROUGHT IN
MERCENARIES FROM SOUTH AFRICA
AND THE NEIGHBORING COUNTRIES,
THE MILITARIES FROM CHAD, NIGER
AND CAMAROON HAVE COME IN AND
BEEN DOING THAT FIGHTING EARLIER
THIS YEAR.
BUT NOW WE ARE SEEING A LOT OF
SUICIDE ATTACKS.
BOKO HARAM CAN'T SEIZE AND HOLD
LAND LIKE THEY USED TO, BUT
GIRLS MOSTLY ARE GOING INTO
MARKETS, INTO MOSQUES AND
BLOWING THEMSELVES UP.
THAT IS WHY WE SEE SO MANY
HEADLINES
HEADLINES FROM OUT OF THERE.
WHAT THE COUNTRY IS DOING IS NOT
ONLY TRYING TO GO IN WITH THE
MILITARY BUT ALSO CREATE A
MULTINATIONAL COALITION WITH
THOSE NEIGHBORS TO GO IN, BUT
IT'S EXTREMELY DIFFICULT, YOU
KNOW.
A LOT OF THESE FIGHTERS BLEND
BACK INTO THE POPULATION AND
THAT A WHY WE ARE SEEING THESE
BOMBS.
INITIALLY THE COUNTRY SET A
DECEMBER DEADLINE TO DEFEAT BOKO
HARAM.
THE MILITARY NOW ADMITS IT WON'T
BE ABLE TO MATCH THAT EVENTUALLY
MOST PEOPLE THINK THAT THE
BATTLE AGAINST BOKO HARAM WILL
BE WON BUT THE WAR AGAINST ALL
OF THESE OTHER THINGS, THE
POVERTY, CORRUPTION, THAT IS
WHAT IS MOST IMPORTANT, THAT
WILL BE THE MOST DIFFICULT FOR
NIGERIA TO WIN.
>> YOU ALSO FOUND A POPULATION
WITHIN NIGERIA THAT BESIDES BOKO
HARAM AND EVERYTHING ELSE, THEY
ARE WORRIED FOR THEIR LIVES JUST
BECAUSE THEY ARE GAY.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
THE SAME SEX MARRIAGE
PROHIBITION ACT WAS PASSED LAST
JANUARY.
THIS NOT ONLY GOES AFTER SAME
SEX MARRIAGE T CRIMINALIZES
HOMOSEXUALITY AND CAN SEND
SOMEONE TO JAIL FOR UP TO 14
YEARS.
IF YOU ADVOCATE FOR GAY RIGHTS
YOU CAN GET TEN RIGHTS.
IF YOU ARE A PARENT AND DON'T
TURN IN YOUR KNOWINGLY GAY SON
OR DAUGHTER, YOU GET TEN YEARS
AS WELL.
NOBODY HAS BEEN PROSECUTED UNDER
THE LAW BUT THIS IS WHAT GAY MEN
AND WOMEN TOLD US AND WHAT WE
SEE IN VIDEO EVIDENCE IS THAT
PEOPLE IN USING THE LAW, IN
ORDER TO INCREASE EXTORTION AND
VIOLENCE.
AND THIS IS MOBS ON THE STREET,
THESE ARE STATE SPONSORED
VIGILANTES AND POLICE OFFICERS
WHO KNOW THAT THEY CAN THREATEN
SOMEONE WHO IS GAY WITH JAIL AND
SO THEY CAN ACTUALLY GET MONEY
OUT OF THEM.
>> Sreenivasan: NICK, WE'RE
LOOKING FORWARD TO THE SERIES ON
THE NEWSHOUR THIS WEEK.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> Sreenivasan: WITH THE U.N.
CONFERENCE SET TO BEGIN IN PARIS
TOMORROW, DELEGATIONS FROM MORE
THAN 190 COUNTRIES WILL TRY TO
AGREE ON A PLAN TO COMBAT
CLIMATE CHANGE.
ONE GOAL IS TO INCREASE RELIANCE
ON CLEAN ENERGY.
FOR A GLIMPSE OF HOW THOSE
ALTERNATIVES MIGHT BE PUT INTO
PRACTICE, WE TURN TO HAWAII,
WHICH HAS THE HIGHEST RATE OF
RESIDENTIAL SOLAR POWER IN THE
U.S.
12% OF HOMES THERE HAVE
INSTALLED PANELS.
MOST REMAIN TIED TO THEIR
ISLAND'S ELECTRICAL GRID BUT
SOME HAWAIIANS HAVE CUT TIES
WITH LOCAL UTILITY PROVIDERS AND
LIVE OFF THE GRID.
HENK ROGERS, CO-FOUNDER OF THE
GAMING COMPANY "TETRIS," IS ONE
THEM.
HE'S EVEN STARTED A BUSINESS
SELLING AND INSTALLING BATTERY
SYSTEMS FOR HOMES RUNNING ON
SOLAR.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
MIKE TAIBBI HAS MORE IN THIS
REPORT WE ORIGINALLY BROUGHT YOU
THIS SUMMER.
>> THE SUBURBAN STREETS OUTSIDE
HOB LIEU LIEU ARE A DENSE
NETWORK OF HOUSES BUT IN THIS
NEIGHBORHOOD ONE HOUSE IS
COMPLETELY INDEPENDENT.
THAT IS ENERGY INDEPENDENT.
>> NOMINAL VOLT AGE, 48 VOLTS,
THESE ARE MY CHARGE CONTROLLERS.
THESE ARE MY INVERTERS.
>> FOR THE LAST TWO YEARS DAVE
GREEN, A HEATING AND AIR
CONDITIONING SPECIALIST HASN'T
PAID ONE CENT IN ELECTRICITY
BILLS.
INSTEAD, HE RELIES ON HIGH BE
END BATTERIES TO STORE THE POWER
GENERATED BY HIS SOLAR POWERS.
WHEN HE FIRST CUT TIES WITH THE
GRID HE HAD TO CONVINCE HIS WIFE
AND DAUGHTERS TO CONSERVE ENERGY
TO MAKE SURE THEY WOULD HAVE
ENOUGH JUICE TO MEET THEIR
NEEDS.
>> DAD WOULD ALWAYS SAY YOU'RE
NOT GOING TO USE THAT, SHUT IT
OFF OR ONLY USE THAT FOR THIS
MUCH, YOU KNOW, DON'T YOU KNOW
THE SUN DIDN'T SHRINE TODAY.
IF YOU NEED TO DO THIS AND
THAT-- YOU'RE ALWAYS MANAGING
THE POWER.
BUT EVENTUALLY YOU GET TO THE
POINT WHERE YOU REALLY DON'T
NEED TO MANAGE IT YOU HAVE
ENOUGH LEEWAY, OH, I LEFT THE
LIGHT ON, WELL, IT DOESN'T
MATTER BECAUSE WE HAVE PLENTY OF
POWER.
>> GREEN DOESN'T CONSIDER
HIMSELF A ENVIRONMENTALIST
AND HE SAYS DEFECTING FROM THE
GRID HAS BEEN A HOBBY MORE THAN
A STATEMENT, LIKE IMPROVING THE
40 PLUS MPG HIS PRIUS WAS
ALREADY GETTING BY ADDING EVEN
MORE BATTERIES.
>> GETTING ABOUT 87 MILES TO THE
GALLON.
>> GREEN ESTIMATES HE SPENT
AROUND $50,000 ON THE CONTINUING
EXPERIMENT IN SELF-RELIANCE HE
CALLS A HOBBY.
HE SAYS THE SYSTEM WILL PAY FOR
ITSELF WITHIN SIX TO EIGHT
YEARS.
>> IT DOES ALL THE CONTROLS, ALL
THE OPERATIONS.
>> IT'S MORE THAN WORTH IT TO
KNOW THAT HE'S IN CONTROL OF HIS
OWN ENERGY.
>> IT'S A NEAT FEELING.
I LIKE THE FEELING OF KNOWING
THAT IF THE PRICE OF ENERGY WERE
TO GO UP OR IF GAS WERE TO
DOUBLE, I WOULD BE LIKE, SO?
>> HANK ROGERS, ANOTHER GRID
DEFECTOR OVER ON THE BIG ISLAND
OF HAWAII REMEMBERS THE
CONFUSION CAUSED BY HIS DECISION
TO CUT TIES WITH THE UTILITY.
>> I HAD A VERY INTERESTING
PHONE CALL.
AND IT GOES SOMETHING LIKE THIS,
IS THIS MR. ROGERS.
YES.
THIS IS SO AND SO FROM THE
ELECTRIC COMPANY.
THERE SEEMS TO BE SOMETHING
WRONG WITH OUR METER.
AND I SAID NO, THERE'S NOTHING
WRONG WITH YOUR METER.
THERE I'M JUST NOT USING ANY OF
YOUR ELECTRICITY.
>> FOR ROGERS, ENERGY
INDEPENDENCE IS NO HOBBY.
HE SPENT A CHUNK OF THE FORTUNE
HE AMASSED LICENSING THE SEMINAL
VIDEO GAME TETRIS EXPERIMENTING
WITH WAYS TO DISCONNECT HIS 32
ACRE RANCH FROM THE GRID.
>> THIS IS THE ENERGY LAB.
>> AN INDUSTRIAL SCALE OF 360
CUTTING EDGE SOLAR PANELS.
>> 85 KILL O WATTS ON THE ROOF.
>> THE LATEST IN ENERGY STORAGE
TECHNOLOGY.
>> THESE ARE OUR BATTERIES HERE.
>> THEY ARE CHARGING NOW.
>> THEY'RE AT 91% NOW.
>> EVEN AN ELECTROLYZER TO MAKE
USE OF ANY EXTRA POWER HIS
SYSTEM GENERATES.
>> WE'RE DONE FILLING THE
BATTERIES, THEN WE START
PRODUCING HYDROGEN.
THIS IS HYDROGEN, THIS IS
OXYGEN.
HIGH SCHOOL CHEMISTRY.
SO THIS IS OUR HYDROGEN FUELING
STATION.
>> HYDROGEN CAN BE USED TO RUN
VEHICLES AND MACHINERY.
ROGERS USES IT THAT WAY.
AND HE USES HIS OWN INTRICATE
AND EXPENSIVE EXPERIMENT IN OFF
THE GRID LIVING TO PRESS HOME A
POINT.
>> WE'RE EXPERIMENTING WITH ALL
OF THIS BECAUSE I CAN, AND
BECAUSE I WANT TO.
AND IT'S THE RIGHT THING TO DO.
>> ROGERS IS CONFIDENT THAT AS
ENERGY STORAGE TECHNOLOGY
ADVANCES, THE NUMBER OF
RESIDENTS CHOOSING TO MOVE OFF
THE ELECTRICAL GRID WILL
INCREASE.
>> OKAY, SO I'M A HIGHER NET
WORTH INDIVIDUAL AND I CAN
AFFORD TO DO THIS.
BUT IT'S A MATTER OF TIME BEFORE
EVERYONE CAN AFFORD TO DO THIS.
AND WHEN THEY CAN, THEY WILL.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW HAS THE
EARTH CHANGED SINCE
INDUSTRIALIZED NATIONS AGREED IN
KYOTO, JAPAN, 18 YEARS AGO TO
LOWER THEIR GREENHOUSE GAS
EMISSIONS?
READ OUR CLIMATE CHANGE PRIMER
ONLINE AT: pbs .org/newshour
THE TWO CIVILIANS SHOT AND
KILLED IN FRIDAY'S SHOOTING AT A
COLORADO SPRINGS PLANNED
PARENTHOOD CENTER HAVE BEEN
IDENTIFIED.
THE DENVER POST REPORTS THEY ARE
36 YEAR OLD JENNIFER MARKOVSKY
AND KEYARE STEWART, ALSO FATHER
OF TWO AND AN IRAQ WAR VETERAN.
TODAY IN SAUDI ARABIA, ABOUT 900
SAUDI WOMEN BEGIN CAMPAIGNING
FOR MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS TO BE
HELD DECEMBER 12-- IT IS THE
FIRST TIME SAUDI WOMEN ACROSS
THE COUNTRY HAVE BEEN PERMITTED
TO RUN FOR PUBLIC OFFICE.
THEY WILL ALSO BE VOTING FOR THE
FIRST TIME.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN, HAVE A
GOOD NIGHT.